[1/N] Tracing doc overhaul (#14073)
mlflow/mlflow: docs/docs/tracing/sdk/manual-instrumentation.mdx

---
sidebar_position: 1
sidebar_label: Manual Tracing
---

import { APILink } from "@site/src/components/APILink";
import { Card, CardGroup, SmallLogoCard } from "@site/src/components/Card";
import TOCInline from "@theme/TOCInline";
import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

# Manual Tracing

In addition to the [Auto Tracing](..#automatic-tracing) integrations, you can instrument your Python code using the MLflow Tracing SDK. This is especially useful when you need to instrument your custom Python code.

> ## Decorator

Author: note: Intentionally avoid the term "fluent API" as we got feedbacks that the concept is hard to understand. I haven't seen a user who actually use client APIs, so here we just show it as a standard APIs and hide the client APIs at the bottom.

Reviewer: We should probably consider removal of that term elsewhere too. Even with the tracking APIs, the vast majority of users utilize those fluent APIs with the context manager for run initiation. Makes sense to be consistent with this information presentation.

Author: Agreed, did a quick code search but luckily we don't use the term too frequently. We can do a follow-up to clean them up entirely:)

- MLflow detects the **parent-child relationships** between functions, making it compatible with auto-tracing integrations.
- Captures **exceptions** during function execution and records them as span events.
- Automatically logs the function’s **name, inputs, outputs, and execution time**.
- Can be used alongside **auto-tracing** features, such as `mlflow.openai.autolog`.

### Example

The following code is a minimum example of using the decorator for tracing Python functions.

```python
import mlflow

@mlflow.trace(span_type="func", attributes={"key": "value"})
def add_1(x):
    return x + 1

@mlflow.trace(span_type="func", attributes={"key1": "value1"})
def minus_1(x):
    return x - 1

@mlflow.trace(name="Trace Test")
def trace_test(x):
    step1 = add_1(x)
    return minus_1(step1)

trace_test(4)
```

![Tracing Decorator](/images/llms/tracing/trace-decorator.png)

:::note

When a trace contains multiple spans with same name, MLflow appends an auto-incrementing suffix to them, such as `_1`, `_2`.

:::

### Customizing Spans

> The <APILink fn="mlflow.trace">`@mlflow.trace`</APILink> decorator creates 

Author: Oops, thanks for the catch!

    span = mlflow.get_current_active_span()
    # Set the attribute to the span
    span.set_attributes({"model": model_id})
    return client.invoke(messages=[{"role": "user", "content": prompt}], model=model_id)
```

### Adding Trace Tags

Tags can be added to traces to provide additional metadata at the trace level. There are a few different ways to set tags on a trace. Please refer to the [how-to guide](sdk/how-to#setting-trace-tags) for the other methods.

```python
@mlflow.trace
def my_func(x):
    mlflow.update_current_trace(tags={"fruit": "apple"})
    return x + 1
```

### Automatic Exception Handling

If an `Exception` is raised during processing of a trace-instrumented operation, an indication will be shown within the UI that the invocation was not
successful and a partial capture of data will be available to aid in debugging. Additionally, details about the Exception that was raised will be included
within ``Events`` of the partially completed span, further aiding the identification of where issues are occurring within your code. 

![Trace Error](/images/llms/tracing/trace-exception.gif)

### Combining with Auto-Tracing

> The `@mlflow.trace` decorator can be used in conjunction with auto tracing. For example, the following code combines OpenAI auto tracing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `@mlflow.trace` decorator can be used in conjunction with auto tracing. For example, the following code combines OpenAI auto-tracing with manually defined spans in a single cohesive and integrated trace.
```

run("What is MLflow?")
```

Running this code generates the following single trace:

![](/images/llms/tracing/tracing-auto-manual-mix.png)

### Function Wrapping

Function wrapping provides a flexible way to add tracing to existing functions without modifying their definitions. This is particularly useful when you want to add tracing to third-party functions or functions defined outside of your control. By wrapping an external function with <APILink fn="mlflow.trace">`@mlflow.trace`</APILink>, you can capture its inputs, outputs, and execution context.

```python
import math
import mlflow

def invocation(x, y, exp=2):
    # Wrap an external function from the math library
    traced_pow = mlflow.trace(math.pow)
    raised = traced_pow(x, exp)

    traced_factorial = mlflow.trace(math.factorial)
    factorial = traced_factorial(int(raised))
    return response

invocation(4)
```

## Context Manager

In addition to the decorator, MLflow allow creating a span with arbitral code block using the <APILink fn="mlflow.start_span" /> context manager. It can be useful for capturing complex interactions within your code beyond the scope of a function.

> Similarly to the decorator, the context manager automatically captures parent-child relationship, exceptions, execution time, and work with auto-tracing. However, the name, inputs, and outputs of the span must be given manually. You can set them via the <APILink fn="mlflow.entities.Span">Span</APILink> object returned from the context manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly to the decorator, the context manager automatically captures parent-child relationship, exceptions, execution time, and works with auto-tracing. However, the name, inputs, and outputs of the span must be provided  manually. You can set them via the <APILink fn="mlflow.entities.Span">Span</APILink> object that is returned from the context manager.
```

```python
with mlflow.start_span(name="my_span") as span:
    span.set_inputs({"x": 1, "y": 2})
    z = x + y
    span.set_outputs(z)
```

> Below is a bit more complex example that uses the <APILink fn="mlflow.start_span" /> context manager in conjunction with the decorator and auto tracing for OpenAI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is a slightly more complex example that uses the <APILink fn="mlflow.start_span" /> context manager in conjunction with both the decorator and auto-tracing for OpenAI.
```
